Oral histories and audio-files of interviews
with surviving punched-card operators, Busa's secretaries, and others The overall objective is to model this important early research center and its activities through a series of purpose-driven and interlinked emulations, 3D spaces, oral histories, and digitized documents and artifacts. We employ metadata to map archival materials and emulations onto the models in order to understand the material history of what is usually taken to be the first humanities computing center. In the process, we complicate the key terms themselves, including first and computing.)
Most of what has been known to date about Busa's early literary data processing was derived from a handful of his own publications-first by Winter (1999); later, Jones (2016) drew on the Busa Archive to contextualize and extend his narrative account.
Rockwell and Sinclair (2014)
and
Terras and Nyhan (2016)
, have continued to clarify the story in different ways. Actually modeling the machinery and workflow allows us to address specific questions about this important moment in the birth of linguistic data processing and humanities computing, such as:
• What were the precise roles played by human operators between the automated stages, sorting card decks, lemmatizing word lists, programming machines via plugboards, etc.? (How were these roles stratified and gendered?)
• What source texts were used for input and how were they prepared and marked up so that the operators could use them as the basis for what they punched on the cards?
• At what stage did IBM agree to print customized punched cards with what amounted to data fields unique to Busa's projects? What was the nature of the data ontology behind these customizations?
• What is the evidence that the work of Busa's center contributed to larger technology developments at IBM, such as Peter Luhn's development of the influential KWIC (keyword in context) protocol for information retrieval? Additional questions will surely arise during the ongoing process of modeling and cross-checking archival materials and oral histories.
Although Busa's humanities computing center is our focus, we believe this methodological approach would be useful in other instances, as a way to conceive of digitization as a process of modeling artifacts and documents in relation to technology and infrastructure. We draw on theoretical approaches and methods associated with media archaeology
(Parikka, 2012;
Emerson, 2014;
Rock- well and Sinclair, 2014;
Sinclair, 2016)
, creative historical prototyping (U Victoria Maker Lab;
Sayers et al, 2016)
, the archaeology of science
(Haigh, 2016;
Schiffer, 2001)
, and on the methods and expertise of digital archaeology in the field of cultural heritage, including its attention to issues of access and preservation
(Koller, 2009;
London Charter, 2009)
.
The presentation at DH 2017 will include slides containing selections from the 800 historical photographs of Busa's center, as well as other images, audio files, and demonstrations, including a prototype 3D virtual model of the center. The paper will explain the project's practical aims and theoretical significance: for example, we address current debates in digital humanities about the influence of text-based analysis on today's definitions and practices; or debates about possible alternative genealogies for DH
(Klein, 2012)
. It will also spotlight the role of gendered labor in early humanities computing, and the entanglements of early humanities technology research with corporate and government funding. Our broader methodological purpose is to take up in practice what Jeffrey Schnapp has called the "defining design challenge of our epoch"-"to weave together information and space in a meaningful fashion"
(Schnapp, 2015)
, and the methods will be of interest and use to others who are approaching multimodal archives and interpolating the information therein.
Acknowledgements
In addition to the coauthors of this paper, contributors to the overall project include Marco Passarotti and Paolo Senna (Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Milan).
Bibliography
Emerson, L. (2014). Reading Writing Interfaces:
From the Digital to the Bookbound. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Haigh, T., Priestley, M., and Rope, C. (2016). Eniac
In
S
Schreibman
R
Siemens
J
Unsworth
A New Companion to Digital Humanities
Wiley Blackwell
Anthropological Perspectives on Technology
M
B
Schiffer
Ed
University of Utah Press
Salt Lake City
Aphorisms on the 21st Century Museum
J
Schnapp
Experiments with Punch Cards
S
Sinclair
and the Invention of the Machine-Generated Concordance
M
Terras
J
Nyhan
Debates in Digital Humanities
Roberto Busa, S.J.,
Minneapolis
University of Minnesota Press
75
University of Victoria Maker Lab
Father Busa's Female Punched-Card Operators
