Roles and Capabilities --successful digital
humanities work is most often conducted in teams, with roles and capabilities from three complementary categories: technical experts, champions of engagement, and content innovators. Within these broad categories, there is great deal of overlap and interdependence; and it is through the overlap of roles and interdependence of capabilities that DH can flourish. Depending on the organizational model in place, projects may draw upon skilled collaborators at various places within an institution (e.g. museums and archives, central IT units) or even at other institutions through consortial agreements. 4. Communication and Outreach --in the early stage of institutional support for digital humanities, individual practitioners are not aware of one another, and there are no established channels for disseminating news and announcements about events, workshops, grants, and other opportunities relevant to digital humanities. As institutional support becomes established, digital humanities mailing lists and event calendars are created, funding is accessible for one-off events and activities, and beginner-oriented training becomes available. High capacity for communications and outreach involves coordinated, regular communication, dedicated funding for activities, and multiple levels of training covering a range of skills.
5.
Acceptance --i.e. the acceptance of digital humanities work as a component of promotion and tenure, of course assessment, and of performance reviews for librarians and IT staff. The white paper notes that academic acceptance of digital humanities work is significantly influenced by developments within particular disciplines, for example, the development of guidelines such as those produced by the Modern Language Association (2012), American Historical Association (2015), and College Art Association (2016) for evaluating digital humanities scholarship. Nonetheless, an institution can increase its capacity at the local level by having department chairs, deans and provosts publicly take a position supporting the assessment of digital scholarship as part of tenure dossiers and advocate for the consistent application of disciplinary guidelines, where available. Acceptance of digital humanities also applies to the evaluation of courses with digital humanities components, as well as to performance evaluations for librarians and staff who support digital humanities work. In the early stage, librarians and IT staff provide digital humanities support "on the margins" of their jobs, whereas at a higher-capacity stage, digital humanities support is an officially recognized aspect of IT staff and librarians' job descriptions, and is factored into performance evaluations accordingly. To complement the capacity building framework, the white paper includes a section on getting started with developing institutional capacity. This section has pointers for how to do an environmental scan and needs assessment, a discussion of interdisciplinarity, recommendations for the kinds of partnerships that support institutional capacity-building, and a number of commonly-used organizational models.
The Department of Digital Humanities (DDH) at King's College London 2011: Cementing Its Status as an Academic Department
N
L
Ithaka S+R
Sustaining the Digital Humanities: Host Institution Support Beyond the Startup Phase
N
L
Maron
S
Pickle
10.18665/sr.22548
Ithaka S+R
Guidelines for Evaluating Work in Digital Humanities and Digital Media
Modern Language Association
Does Every Research Library Need a Digital Humanities Center
J
Erway
R
Us/Governance/Committees/CommitteeListings/Professional-Issues/Committee-onInformation-Technology/Guidelines-for-EvaluatingWork-in-Digital-Humanities-and-Digital-Media Schaffner
S
Varner
P
Hswe
Special Report: Digital Humanities in Libraries
