(McPherson 2012, Sweeney 2013, Chun 2011) These topics also arise in venues such as journal special issues (see, for example: Code4Lib Special Issue on Diversity in Library Technology, 2015; Archival Science Special Issue: Keeping Cultures Alive: Archives and Indigenous Human Rights, 2012; Library Quarterly Special Issue on Diversity and Library and Information Science Education, 2013), conference presentations and keynotes (Noble 2015, Matienzo 2015, Cole 2015) such as held by the Society of American Archivists, and current CFPs, such as those of Digital Humanities Quarterly, Archives, and ALISE. New interdisciplinary projects focus on building new methods and tools for archiving media content as a corrective to past silences in the archive (Documenting the Now, Social Media Archives Toolkit, Documenting Ferguson, Our
Marathon, to name a few). This work suggests more challenging questions: What ethical decisions inform the dissemination of digital collections? How are naming and representation in our information systems influenced by power? When tools and interfaces guide interactions with documents and items, are those interfaces responsive to community needs, or do they force a diversity of ideas into illfitting boxes?
To engage with these issues and inform the toolkit we plan two forum events at which we seek to gather a diversity of perspectives and input on the questions above. The first forum will be held in October 2017, and our preparation for that event will involve a detailed scan of existing LIS and museum pedagogy in the areas central to our focus, and an examination of existing project methodologies and processes. We will also develop a set of design provocations, discussion questions, and a reading list. The poster will present the results of the environmental scan, the design prompts, reading list, and discussion questions for the opening forum, and the preliminary design ideas for the toolkit for critique and commentary by DH2017 conference participants. Our goal for the project is to involve diverse community input at every stage of the design, and this poster represents the first step in that process.
Bibliography
Berman, S. ( 1971 ).
1971
