Research Questions
Hrómundar saga Gripssonar traditionally belongs in the corpus of legendary sagas (fornaldarsö gur); it was included in the second volume of Rafn's (1829) Fornaldarsögur Norðrlanda, and in Bjö rner's (1737) Nordiska kämpa dater. The saga as it is known today, however, is a post-medieval re-working of a metrical version of the story known as rı́murrı́mur
(Brown, 1946)
, and is probably not much older than seventeenth century. Therefore it does not necessarily fit well with the other texts included the corpus of legendary sagas, as they usually date from the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries
(Driscoll, 2005:207)
. This makes Hrómundar saga Gripssonar an interesting case study for investigations of the text's genre affiliation in the extant manuscripts preserving the saga. Does it appear frequently in manuscripts with the older legendary sagas or with younger rı́murrı́mur-based narratives? To answer this question, I first examine the manuscript context of legendary sagas as a corpus, based on collaborative research with Rowbotham and Wills (
Kapitan et al., 2017)
; second, I examine the position of Hrómundar saga Gripssonar within the corpus and its relationships with other texts.
State of the Art
Much discussion in the field of Old Norse studies centers on whether the legendary sagas deserve to be considered a separate literary genre, or should instead be analyzed as chivalric literature
(Quinn, 2006
). One of the main reasons for these considerations seems to be the fact that the term fornaldarsö gur is not attested in the medieval texts; it was introduced in the early nineteenth century by C.C. Rafn, who published a collection of texts under the title Fornaldarsögur Norðrlanda (Rafn, 1829). Rafn's selection of texts and the definition of fornaldarsö gur as a corpus of texts dealing with events taking place in Scandinavia before the settlement of Iceland, however, was not detached from pervious scholarship of early eighteenth century
(Lavender, 2015)
. The current discussion on the legendary sagas as a corpus (or a genre) is polarized around contradicting opinions. Some scholars suggest that the legendary sagas had to be considered a separate category in pre-modern period, because they are frequently bound together in the manuscripts
(GuðmundsdóttirGuðmundsdóttir, 2001:cxlvii;
Mitchell, 1991:21)
while others, using the same argument, emphasize strong connections between the legendary sagas and the chivalric sagas (
Driscoll, 2005:193
). Additional problems arise when classifying the generic hybrids
(Rowe 1993;
2004
) appearing within the corpus, or distinguishing between the legendary sagas (fornaldarsö gur) and the late legendary sagas (fornaldarsö gur sı́ðarisı́ðari tı́matı́ma; Driscoll 2005). Even though scholars eagerly turn towards the manuscript context to support their claims regarding the genre classification, no comprehensive overview of the legendary sagas' codicological context has yet been presented. This gave rise to the project Stories for all times conducted at the University of Copenhagen, which created a complete catalogue of manuscripts preserving legendary sagas. The catalogue contains 818 TEI-conformant XML-based manuscript descriptions with over 8000 items, 1764 of which are classified as legendary sagas and 920 as chivalric sagas. This amount of data is much too large to be analyzed manually, therefore it is necessary to apply computer-assisted analysis in order to draw some general conclusions regarding this corpus and the relationships between these texts.
Methods
The first part of my paper, which aims to establish the position of Hrómundar saga Gripssonar within the wider context of the manuscript, draws on the network analysis of the corpus, conducted in collaboration with
Rowbotham and Wills (Kapitan et al., 2017)
. There, the codicological context of a text was considered as a system of relationships between texts, and following
Hall's (2013)
approach in his network of chivalric sagas, texts were represented as nodes, manuscripts as edges, both visualized with the free visualization software Gephi. The second part is based on database queries aimed at obtaining detailed information about particular manuscripts and their contents. The main focus of the analysis was to examine the manuscripts preserving the complete texts of Hrómundar saga Gripssonar in Icelandic, therefore the manuscripts containing excerpts and translations were ignored. The distribution of texts appearing frequently alongside Hrómundar saga Gripssonar by century has been obtained using XPath queries of the online catalogue Stories for all times.
Main Findings
As a result of this research, the hypothesis can be confirmed: generally, texts belonging to one genre appear most frequently in manuscripts with other texts belonging to the same genre. However, an interesting transmission history of Hrómundar saga Gripssonar suggests a close association of this saga with the late legendary sagas, and in particular Bragða-Ölvis saga. Both Bragða-Ölvis saga and Hrómundar saga Gripssonar are post-medieval reworkings of older metric versions of the stories (rı́murrı́mur), and for both texts the manuscript AM 601 b 4to (Aj rni MagnússonMagnússon Institute, Reykjavı́kReykjavı́k) was suggested as the witness carrying the best text of the saga
(Andrews, 1911;
Brown, 1946;
Hooper, 1934;
Hooper, 1932)
. Even though Hrómundar saga Gripssonar appears most frequently with texts classified as late legendary sagas in pre-1800 manuscripts, after 1800 the texts classified as (traditional) fornaldarsö gur start to dominate. The late Bragða-Ölvis saga dominates the pre-1800 setting, but the distribution changes in the nineteenth century when Þorsteins saga Víkingssonar, Starkaðar saga gamla, Friðþjófs saga ins fraekna, and Hálfs saga Hálfsreka appear more frequently (as presented on figure below). Starkaðar saga gamla is a lateeighteenth century saga written by Snorri Bjö rnson (1710-1803), utilizing traditional legendary motifs of Saxo's Gesta Danorum and legendary sagas
(Driscoll, 2009:209;
Simek and Hermann Paísson, 1987:331)
, so its co-occurrence with other legendary sagas starting from the eighteenth century onwards is not surprising. The three remaining texts that started to appear more frequently alongside Hrómundar saga Gripssonar in nineteenth-century manuscripts were all published in the same volume of Rafn's Fornaldarsögur Norðrlanda, in which Hrómundar saga Gripssonar was published (volume II); likewise FriðþjófsFriðþjófs saga ins fraekna, and Hálfs saga Hálfsreka appeared in Bjö rner's edition from 1737 together with Hrómundar saga Gripssonar. This shows how printed editions influenced the saga's transmission in the manuscript form. A text, which once showed strong connections to another rı́murrı́mur-based narrative, became detached from its previous setting and gained new, print-influenced context after becoming part of printed editions.
Relevance
The topic of this paper fits in the advertised panel "Quantitative stylistics and philology, including big data and text mining studies," as it employs database quarrying and network analysis of significant amount of data.
Figure 1 .
1
Acknowledgements
The author of this paper owes a great debt to Tarrin Wills for merging the data from various databases (fasnl.ku.dk, skaldic.abdn.ac.uk, handrit.is, onpweb.nfi.sc.ku.dk) to obtain the input data for the network analysis, and to Tim Rowbotham, who worked on standardizing the uniform titles and genre classifications in the XML-files in the Stories for all times catalogue.
Nordiska kämpa dater i en sagoflock samlade om forna kongar och hjältar
E
J
Björner
Volumen historicum, continens variorum in orbe hyperboreo antiquo regum, heroum et pugilum res praeclare et mirabiliter gestas. Accessit, praeter conspectum genealogicum Svethicorum regum et reginarum accuratissimum etiam praefatio. Stockholmiae: typis J.L., Horrn
28
The saga of HrómundHrómund Gripsson and Þorgilssaga
U
Brown
Saga-Book
13
Late prose fiction (lygisö gur). A Companion to Old Norse-Icelandic Literature and Culture
M
J
Driscoll
Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Oxford
Editing the Fornaldarsö gur Norðurlanda. Á Austrvega, Saga and East Scandinavia, Preprints of the 14th International Saga Conference Uppsala 9th -15th
M
J
Driscoll
Gä vle: University of Gä vle
Gephi
Gephi: The open graph viz platform
Making stemmas with small samples, and digital approaches to publishing them: testing the stemma of KonráðsKonráðs saga keisarasonar
A
Hall
K
Parsons
Online catalogue handrit
9
Genre in the saga literature: A Squib
J
Harris
Scandinavian Studies
47
4
Bragða-Ǫlvis saga" now first edited
A
G
Hooper
Leeds Studies in English
1
HrómundarHrómundar saga Gripssonar and the Griplur
A
G
Hooper
Leeds Studies in English
3
Visualising genre relationships in Icelandic manuscripts
K
A
Kapitan
T
Rowbotham
T
Wills
Conference Abstracts. Gothenburg: The University of Gothenburg
The Secret Prehistory of the Fornaldarsö gur
P
Lavender
The Journal of English and Germanic Philology
114
4
Heroic Sagas and Ballads
S
Mitchell
Cornell University Press
Ithaca and London
The "Stories for all time
Nordisk
Forskningsinstitut
Interrogating Genre in the Fornaldarsö gur: Round-Table Discussion'. Viking and Medieval Scandinavia
2
Fornaldarsögur Norðrlanda. Kaupmannahö fn
C
C
Rafn
Generic Hybrids: Norwegian 'Family' Sagas and Icelandic 'Mythic-Heroic' Sagas
E
A
Rowe
Scandinavian Studies
65
4
Þorsteins þáttrþáttr uxafótsuxafóts, Helga þáttrþáttr ÞórissonarÞórissonar,' and the Conversion 'þaettir'
E
A
Rowe
Scandinavian Studies
76
4
Lexikon Der Altnordischen Literatur, Die Mittelalterliche Literatur Norwegens Und Islands. (Krö ners Taschenausgabe 490)
R
Simek
H
Pálsson
Krö ner
Stuttgart
? University of Copenhagen (n.d.) Ordbog over det norrøne prosasprog Registre
Skaldic Project Academy Body. (n.d.) Skaldic project
