Site-specific digital literature project
Site-specific digital literature, by allowing users to access place-bound, multimodal digital literature via mobile devices, opens doors for creative expression, place making as well as experiencing traditional texts in a new way. It can also contribute to a better understanding of the relationship between digital interfaces, spatiality and people and empower people in terms of what is called place-making practices
(Kaye, 2000:203;
Turner & Davenport, 217-220)
.
Byderhand
(Byderhand.net, 2016)
, is a site-specific digital literature project launched during the 2015 Aardklop National Arts Festival in Potchefstroom, South Africa. Users accessed multimodal texts on their mobile devices through QR-codes deployed around various sites at the North-West University. Byderhand was awarded the Aartvark prize for a ground breaking production, and the team was approached to host similar productions elsewhere. In 2016 the Byderhand-project and platform were used in various educational contexts. Most recently, the Byderhandteam, assisted 1st additional language (Afrikaans) learners at a Potchefstroom secondary school to publish their own site-specific digital literature on the school grounds.
Although there is a demand for expansion of the Byderhand-project, cost and scalability are limiting factors. First, in its current form, implementing the project requires a team of dedicated members. is Second, functionality depends on the provision, maintenance and upgrading of infrastructure such as servers and physical QR-codes. On the user end, mobile data cost is a constraining factor. Therefore, we explored the design of the infrastructure for an automated platform that could empower a low-skilled user, to create, publish and access their own projects. This was important as usability of a platform can ether promote access or restrict it through the way the interface is developed
(Shneiderman, B. 2003)
.
The infrastructure chosen was a single-board computer (Raspberry Pi) and a platform was developed based on open standards.
Virtual museum project
South Africa's heritage landscape remains largely skewed in ways that exclude intangible heritage such as stories and memories of such events as apartheidera forced removals. A virtual museum of forced removals aids in remedying this by offering an in situ space where people can give voice to their experience and preserve it for future generations.
Educational applications:
a. How the platform could be ported into other applications such as freestanding, free-access libraries for schools and community centers. b. Educational possibilities created that can introduce students to the world of digital literature. c. A lesson in the value of interdisciplinary collaborations. 5. Building collaborative communities and empowering them to tell their own stories. 6. Mini-showcase of the project
Kaye, N. (2000) Site-Specific Art: Performance, Place and Documentation
Shneiderman, B. (2003) "Promoting universal usability with
multi-layer interface design." In ACM SIGCAPH Computers and the Physically Handicapped
(No. 73-74, pp. 1-8)
. ACM.
Turner, P. & Davenport, E. eds. (2006) Spaces, Spatiality and Technology
