Rationale
Literary canon formation and change has long been of concern to literary scholars. Writing in 1979, in terms that prefigure our current concerns with the scope of computational analysis, Alastair Fowler admits, "The literature we criticize and theorize about is never the whole. At most we talk about sizable subsets of the writers and works of the past. This limited field is the current literary canon" (97). Fowler defined six types of literary canons arising from various constraints and choices: official, personal, potential, accessible, selective, and critical. Anthologies are frequently taken to represent the literary canon because in themselves they constitute what Fowler calls a "selective canon," a subset of works chosen by an editor (or editorial team) presumably for particular reasons. Anthologies make works accessible to a wide range of readers and also contribute to (or potentially constrain) the pedagogical canon, the subset of works that are taught
(Harris 112-13)
. Anthologies often reflect the critical canon, as works that become interesting to scholars gradually start showing up in anthologies.
In the so-called "culture wars" of the 1980s-1990s, debates about multiculturalism and changes to the humanities curriculum frequently focused on anthologies and syllabi as synecdoches for university education (Graff). As John Guillory suggests, both the conservative and progressive sides in this debate tended to rely on "an ideology of tradition" which invokes "an autonomous history of literature, which is always a history of writers and not of writing" (Guillory 63). For Guillory and Bourdieu, the history of writing can only be understood in relation to mechanisms of cultural value.
When literary scholars write about anthologies, they frequently describe how the selective canon changes over time; examine the ideological assumptions that undergird the selection process; and point out historical or thematic gaps in anthology coverage. Yet the method that they use for doing this primarily rests upon counting authors (Golding, Harris, Latane). Others use the number of pages allotted to each author as a proxy for importance or weight within the anthology (Bode, Damrosch, Lecker).
Such approaches reify the ideology of tradition in assuming that author names alone adequately describe the complexities of literary history. As Guillory suggests, "histories of canon formation, when they consist primarily of a narrative of reputations, of the names which pass in and out of literary anthologies explain nothing. Such narrative histories fail to recognize generic or linguistic shifts which underlie the fortunes of individual authors by establishing what counts as literature at a given historical moment" (Guillory 64). By offering a network analysis approach that allows us to explore "what counts as literature" rather than just "who counted" in different anthologies, we can better understand the structures of value instantiated and reproduced in these collections and thereby better understand the history of taste and value. For example, rather than simply noting the unsurprising fact that the Victorian poet laureate Alfred Tennyson is included in all anthologies of Victorian literature and accepting that he is thereby a canonical figure, this approach allows for discovering more precisely which poems by Alfred Tennyson were valued in
1880, 1930, or 1980
, and how those choices corresponded with selections from other poets.
Method
In this paper I explore the utility of several different approaches to analyzing the structures of canon formation as represented in poetry anthologies. These include:
• examining the structure of the bimodal network created between anthologies and poems; • measuring anthology similarity based on textual couplings; • examining the co-printing network created by connecting each poem in an anthology to every other poem printed in that same anthology • Each of these approaches will be explored using the full dataset and by using chronological slices that will further the understanding of historical changes in the anthology canon. In the first approach, I treat the relationships of poems to anthologies as a bimodal affiliate network. Although some researchers avoid bimodal representations of relationships because standard measures of centrality and other metrics do not apply, force-directed visualization of bimodal data "is often extremely effective for transmitting a holistic understanding of the whole dataset" (Borgatti 10). Faust and Borgatti have each recommended approaches to calculating centrality for affiliation networks that I will also explore. I also examine centralization (core-periphery structure) and structural equivalence measures for the affiliation network.
The remaining two approaches derive from established practices in bibliographic network analysis, particularly bibliographic coupling and cocitation analysis. Although co-citation analysis has largely overtaken bibliographic coupling in recent decades, recent comparative studies suggest that the utility of each approach varies depending on the timeframe and construction of the citation dataset (Boyack et al).
Bibliographic coupling draws an edge between two documents which each cite a third (Kessler). To understand the similarities among these anthologies, I create a textual coupling network, which consists only of anthology nodes, and create an edge between each anthology that prints the same poem. This network shows the degree of similarity between anthologies and filtering the poem nodes used to create the edge weights allows for exploration of which texts create distinctive differences among the anthologies.
In co-citation analysis, an edge is created between two documents which are cited together in a third document (Small). In my co-printing network, which consists only of poem nodes, I create an edge between poems that are printed in the same anthology. Calculating modularity for this network reveals clusters of poems that frequently occur together in the same anthology. These clusters are made up of texts by multiple authors and can be used to explore components of canonicity, such as thematic, formal, or aesthetic qualities shared by poems in each cluster. This paper argues that network analysis is a useful approach to examine the structure of the cultural field of Victorian poetry as it was constituted in key literary and teaching anthologies published from 1880-2002. Bibliography
Anthologies of British Poetry: Critical Perspectives from Literary and Cultural Studies
C
Bode
Ed. Barbara Korte, Ralf Schneider, and Stefanie Lethbridge
Amsterdam: Rodopi
Re-Definitions of the Canon of English Romantic Poetry in Recent Anthologies
2-Mode Concepts in Social Network Analysis. Encyclopedia of Complexity and System Science
S
Borgatti
Springer
Medford
The Field of Cultural Production, or: The Economic World Reversed
P
Bourdieu
The Field of Cultural Production: Essays on Art and Literature
Randal Johnson
New York: Columbia UP
The Rules of Art: Genesis and Structure of the Literary Field
P
Bourdieu
Susan Emanuel. Stanford
Stanford University Press
Co-citation analysis, bibliographic coupling, and direct citation: Which citation approach represents the research front most accurately?
K
Boyack
R
Klavans
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology
61
From the Old World to the Whole World
D
Damrosch
Jeffrey Di Leo. Lincoln
NE: U of Nebraska
On Anthologies: Politics and Pedagogy
Centrality in Affiliation Networks
K
Faust
Social Networks
19
Genre and the Literary Canon
A
Fowler
New Literary History
11
A History of American Poetry Anthologies
A
C
Golding
Canons. Ed. Robert von Hallberg. Chicago
P
London: U Of Chicago
Beyond the Culture Wars: How Teaching the Conflicts can Revitalize American Education
G
Graff
W. W. Norton
New York
Cultural Capital: The Problem of Literary Canon Formation
J
Guillory
Chicago and London: The U of Chicago Press
Canonicity
W
Harris
PMLA
106
Bibliographic coupling between scientific papers
M
Kessler
American Documentation
24
Recent Anthologies
D
Latané
Victorian Poetry
38
Keepers of the Code: English-Canadian Literary Anthologies and the Representation of the Nation
R
Lecker
Toronto
U of Toronto P
Co-citation in the scientific literature: a new measure of the relationship between two documents
H
Small
Journal of the American Society for Information Science
24
