Anthology of American Literature, World Literature, Western Literature, Poetry, Drama, Theory and Criticism, Short Fiction, Literature by Women, African American Literature, Latino Literature, Jewish American Literature, etc.
Much can be learned about the ways in which the Nortons were designed from these titles alone. First, the largest anthologies are defined by both geography and a linear temporality influenced by conventions of periodization.
The Norton Anthology of World Literature lays claim to it all, from Afghanistan to Zimbabwe, and from Gilgamesh to Orhan Pamuk. Western Literature claims a smaller (if vaguer) part of the world, and English and American literature focus on national literatures, including postcolonial and expatriate writers within the bounds of the nation-concept. While these geographic anthologies are ostensibly genre-agnostic, others are genre-specific (Poetry, Drama, Short Fiction). And the last type focuses on writing by and about writers of a specific gender (By Women), ethnicity (Latino), or religion (Jewish).
One of the premises we read as implicit in the Norton's design, then, is that some authors and works become significant enough to include only in specific contexts. Making it into the World Literature anthology seems to denote significance at a greater level than inclusion in the Western Literature anthology alone would. Likewise, seeing a writer anthologized in Short Fiction but not World Literature seems to imply a significance limited to that literary form. Canon formation has always relied on a logic of a ranking or tiering, and the pool of authors and texts against which a given work "competes" is greatest at the largest scale of population. We argue that the geographically bound Nortons can be read in such a way that they imply a hierarchy even among the canons the anthologies already connote.
Of course, all of the decisions we measure across these many tables of contents are underwritten by a human element. Many practical and historical factors that exist at a slant to the question of a work's "canonicity" attend the production of an anthology that stretches to more than 6,000 pages, serves tens of thousands of instructors and students, and our analysis attempts to account for these factors. A quantitative approach is necessary but not sufficient to read the ways in which the Nortons have represented and continue to represent works that, taken together, lay claim to the status of a national, generic, or global literature. Two key examples of the incommensurability of the form to its implicit claims: Because of its length, the novel is poorly served by the anthology form. Some shorter novels and novellas do get anthologized. But, more often than not, writers who are primarily known as novelists are represented by a single short story, or an excerpt from a novel. The second overarching practicality is the influence of authorial estates and the cost of printing rights, especially for 20th and 21st century authors.
As a way of approaching these institutional and qualitative questions, we have begun a set of interviews with Martin Puchner, the current general editor of the World and Western anthologies, and will discuss some of his insights into the decision-making process in the presentation. Among these include the influence of instructor and student surveys on texts that get selected, the impact of rights costs on the texts that get chosen for a given author, and the place of editorial intervention in relation to these powerful practicalities.
Our database and the attendant institutional research on the Nortons as the product of both scholarly editing and the demands of the market allow us to see the trajectories not only of individual authors and works, but broader trends of inclusion and exclusion in the Norton's canon. By gathering data about both the works and the authors who wrote them, we reveal the ways in which the Norton has responded to the expansion of the literary canon, growing in size while simultaneously giving a greater share of its pages to authors and ideas that would not have been considered canonical 1962. In the process, we find authors whose literary reputation has waxed or waned (or both); those whose names have been a constant presence, but whose representative works have dramatically changed; those who were slated for canonization but never "made it;" and those who have arrived late but seem to be here to stay.
Like many of the Stanford Literary Lab's projects, "Reading Norton Anthologies" operates at several scales at once. We are interested both in individual texts and authors, as well as broader patterns of representation and contextualization within the confines of this object that occupies liminal spaces between statement and syllabus, and between the market and the canon.
Bibliography Bausch, R.
The Norton Anthology of American Literature
N
Baym
Eighth. W.W. Norton & Company
The Field of Cultural Production
P
Bourdieu
Columbia University Press
The Norton Anthology of Poetry
M
Ferguson
M
J
Salter
J
Stallworthy
Norton & Company
The Norton Anthology of African American Literature
H
L
Gates
Jr
Norton & Company
The Norton Anthology of Literature by Women: The Tradition in English
S
Gilbert
Gubar
S
W.W. Norton & Company
The Norton Anthology of English Literature
S
Greenblatt
Ninth. W.W. Norton & Company
Cultrural Capital: The Problem of Literary Canon Formation
J
Guillory
Puchner, M., ed.
University of Chicago Press
The Norton Anthology of Western Literature. 9th ed. W.W. Norton & Company
The Norton Antholog of World Literature
M
Puchner
3rd ed. W.W. Norton & Company
King Lear
W
Shakespeare
George Hunter. Penguin Classics. Penguin
The Norton Anthology of Latino Literature
I
Stavans
First. W.W. Norton & Company
