Placing Segregation is the primary result of this research effort - a new, open access digital project at the University of Iowa Libraries' Digital Scholarship and
Publishing Studio that explores research questions about housing segregation and socioeconomic disparities across nineteenth century American cities through a series of fully interactive maps and scholarly interpretations derived from the geolocated census data. This presentation introduces core functionality of the digital exhibit and also explains in detail the process of developing the data and the website.
Built primarily upon Leaflet.js, an open-source JavaScript library for mobile friendly interactive maps, as well as other openly available JavaScript libraries such as Fuse.js, this digital map exhibit gives public audiences direct access to detailed census data for the years 1860 and 1870 in these select U.S. cities. A search feature allows visitors to quickly locate the historical residences of persons of interest and read complete census information about them, while a number of simple layer filters permit users to explore potentially infinite topics by giving them direct control over the geographic data. The primary digital exhibit gives audiences without GIS experience the power to ask research questions in a spatial environment.
Initial research findings from the project indicate that urban historians have been substantially underestimating the degree of housing segregation experienced by free black residents, even though some past research built on ward-level analyses closely approximated the extent of housing segregation between the native white population and various immigrant groups. The data generated for this project illustrate American cities were in fact significantly divided according to social class and wealth, long before the rise of the automobile. However, residents were less divided by wealth differences than they were separated spatially by skin color in Washington D.C. or by German and Irish origin in Nashville and Omaha.
Bibliography
DeBats, D. A., and Lethbridge, M. (2005). GIS and the City:
Nineteenth-century Residential Patterns. Historical Geography. Vol 33: 78-98.
Massey, D., and Denton, N. A. (1993). American Aparheid:
Segregation and the Making of the Underclass. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
