s Early Modern Manuscripts Online and Shakespeare's World, The Recipes Project or Bess of Hardwick's Letters. Transcriptions in DEx are undertaken by a small community of scholars:
this paper explains how our community currently works and the future collaborations we hope to undertake, as well as the possible avenues for extending the project after its forthcoming full launch.
In 2010, Paul Conway argued that "We are at the end of 'boutique' digital scanning projects for which the principal goal is … extraordinary attention to the unique properties of each artifact" (76). This paper contends that with early modern manuscripts, "boutique" projects are one of the best ways forward. Compared to massive manuscript digitization projects like British Literary Manuscripts Online, DEx is a "boutique" project actually make texts searchable with transcription, which is always the result of paying attention to each manuscript as a "unique artifact." This paper discusses the challenges that come with curating a boutique project and the ultimate benefits of having a small site that emerges from a specific set of research questions.
Although small digitization or transcription projects can open up a vast field of research, they need to be findable and peer-reviewed in order to do so. I examine the obstacles to having DEx published by a traditional publisher, while questioning how to define publication for digital projects and the costs associated with creating and maintaining an open access site. Furthermore, I discuss how digital publishing must address the peer review needs of emerging scholars and provide an imprimatur and guarantee of quality for users. The final section of this paper discuss the role of Iter: Gateway to the Middle Ages and Renaissance and ReKN: Renaissance Knowledge Network in publication and peer review for DEx: A Database of Dramatic Extracts. This is an appropriate short paper for DH 2017 because it discusses a project that is in beta and active development, it engages the larger questions of how and why boutique digital projects can flourish and provide value to humanities scholarship, and it engages the theme of "Access/Accès" by focusing on collaboration, public-facing scholarship, and digital humanities publication. The paper focuses on a single case study: DEx: A Database of Dramatic Extracts and its community, which addresses a much-needed gap in scholarship by transcribing manuscripts that tell us what Shakespeare's audience and readers actually read.
Bibliography
Conway, P. ( 2010 ) "Preservation in the Age of Google: Dig-, F., Fritze, C., and Vogeler, G.
2010
