Corpora and Comparisons
For ease of references, we assigned an acronym for each of the 14 corpora, and show their names in Chinese (Collection) and periods of publication (Time) in
Table 1
. The corpora consist of representative literature that has been published since 1046BC. In particular, we have at least one collection for each of the major dynasties that existed before 1644AD. The majority of our collections are of poetic works (we consider SJ, CV, HF, PT, CTP, CSP, CSL, YSX, and LCSJ collections of poetic works) which fact lends itself to the study of the effects of genres on the character distributions. A collection of poetic works for the Qing Dynasty (which lasted from 1644 to 1912AD) is unavailable because an editorial committee is still working on its production
(Zhu, 1994)
.
The corpora contain more than 42 million characters, excluding the punctuation marks that were added into the corpora by the data providers. When counting the characters, we also exclude characters that cannot be shown on ordinary computers. The frequencies of such rare and obsolete characters are not large, so ignoring them will not affect the statistical properties reported in this study.
Only the ASBC was segmented and the segmentation was verified by human experts. Hence, we can inspect its character and word distributions. The other corpora were written in classical Chinese and we do not have a reliable way for segmentation, so we will only analyze the character distributions.
We created charts that are based on the typical form of Zipf's law:
( ) ) ( log ) ( log w r k N w f α − = ⎟ ⎠ ⎞ ⎜ ⎝ ⎛
where w, f(w), and r(w) denote a word, its frequency, and rank in a corpus, respectively. The rank of the most frequent word in a corpus is 1. N is the size of the corpus, and k and 񮽙 are constants.
Observations and Discussions: Influences of Genres and Epochs
The generalizability of the Zipf's law is the main reason that it has attracted the attention of many researchers. It can be applied to various natural distributions including those of part-of-speech of words (
Wang et al, 2012
), city sizes (
Anderson and Ge, 2005)
, and corporal revenues
(Chen et al, 2008
).
Figure 1
shows the Zipfian curves when we consider the character distributions of all of the 14 corpora. We intentionally plot the curves in one chart, although this makes the individual curves undistinguishable. Although the curves are not linear, which is common as reported in the literature, the curves show a consistent trend, suggesting a common regularity that is shared by Chinese texts that were produced over the period of 3000 years. Instead of treating the 14 corpora as a single corpus to fit the resulting distribution for Zipf's law, we examined the curves to investigate possible factors that influenced the positions of the curves. In
Figure 2
, we show the curves of lyrics ("詞" /ci2/) and poems ("詩" /shi1/. The left halves of the curves overlap almost perfectly, which strongly indicates that the poetic works share very close statistical characteristics.
Table 2
lists ten most frequent characters found in each of the corpora and for which the curves are plotted in
Figure 2
. The lists are very similar, and, out of the 60 characters in
Table 2
, there are only 16 distinct characters (some of which are homonyms, for which only one pronunciation is provided). In fact, we can compare the most frequent characters of any two corpora, e.g., the CTP and the CSP, to further investigate their similarity
(Chen et al, 2012
), and we found that the most frequent 1700 characters in the CTP and the CSP are the same characters.
Not all of the corpora of poetic works have similar curves. We added the curves for the SJ, CV, and HF in
Figure 3
, and it is evident that these new curves do not overlap with those in
Figure 2
very well. The poetic works in the SJ, CV, and HF were produced very much earlier than those listed in
Figure 2
. While the time of the production of the corpora affects the Zipfian curves, the curves for corpora that were produced in the same dynasty may not be the same. The CTW, MZM, and CTP are three different types of works that were all produced in the Tang Dynasty. We compared the most frequent characters shared by the CTP and CTW, and found that the sets of their most frequent 2000 characters differ only in three characters. Despite such an extreme overlap, their curves in
Figure 4
suggest that genre affects the character distributions. Given the above observations, one may have expected that the curves for the novels that were published in the 16 th and 18 th centuries, i.e., the JTTW and DRC, will deviate from the curves for the earlier poems, as the curves in
Figure 5
show.
Character vs. Word distributions
We considered the character distribution when we analyzed the contents of the ASBC in
Figure 1
, where we found that the character distributions of the vernacular and classical Chinese texts show a reasonable common trend. The ASBC contains documents that were written in vernacular Chinese, so we must also analyze its word distribution, and
Figure 6
shows the curves for both the character and word distributions.
A chart like that of
Figure 6
can mislead one to infer that Chinese texts do not conform to Zipf's law. It is well accepted that the number of Chinese characters is limited, although there is no consensus about the exact number of characters. In contrast, there is virtually no limit on the number of legal Chinese n-grams. As a result, the sharp downturn of the character distribution and the intersection of the two curves in
Figure 6
are expected, and this can be observed in languages other than Chinese in some special settings
(Montemurro, 2001
). We should examine the Zipfian curves on the same basis, e.g., character or word, while considering cultural factors that may influence actual language usage.
Concluding Remarks
We have judged the similarity between the Ziphian curves based on the visual closeness, though we can quantify the degree of similarity when desired (Hu and
Kuo, 2005
). Researchers have noticed the deviations of Zipfian curves at the high- and low-frequency ends (
Hu and
Kuo, 2005, Rousseau and
Zhang, 1992
) and tried to find density functions that fit the data. The statistics at the high-frequency ends of the curves are evidently more reliable. We focused on the deviations at the high-frequency ends of the curves, and discussed how the deviations in these regions may relate to the genres and epochs of the corpora, employing the lists of most frequent characters of the corpora as extra supports.
Figure 1 .
1
Figure 3 .
3
Figure 4 .
4
Figure 5 .
5
Figure 6 .
6
Table 1 .
1
The corpora used in this study include texts published during 1046BC-2007AD.
Table 2 .
2
Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by the grant 104-2221-E-004-005-MY3 from the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan, the grant USA-HAR-105-V02 from the Top University Strategic Alliance of Taiwan, and the Senior Fulbright Research Grant 2016-2017.
Bibliography
G
Altmann
K.-H
Best
L
Hřebíček
R
Köhler
V
Kromer
O
Rottmann
A
Schulz
G
Wimmer
Ziegler
Glottometrics
A.
5
RAM-Verlag
The size distribution of Chinese cities
G
Anderson
Y
Ge
Regional Science and Urban Economics
35
A statistical study on Chinese word and character usage in literatures from the Tang dynasty to the present
Q
Chen
J
Guo
Y
Liu
Journal of Quantitative Linguistics
19
3
The Zipf's law in the revenue of top 500 Chinese companies
Q
Chen
J
Zhang
Wang
Y
Proc. of the Fourth Int'l Conf. on Wireless Communications, Networking and Mobile Computing
of the Fourth Int'l Conf. on Wireless Communications, Networking and Mobile Computing
Rank-frequency relation for Chinese characters
W
Deng
A
E
Allahverdyan
B
Li
Wang
Q
A
The European Physical Journal B
87
47
Extension of Zipf's law to word and character n-grams for English and Chinese, Int'l J. of Computational Linguistics and Chinese Language Processing
L
Q
Ha
E
I
Sicilia-Garcia
J
Ming
F
J
Smith
8
Universality and scaling in the statistical data of literary works, POLA Forever: Festschrift in Honor of Professor William S
C.-K
Hu
W.-C
Kuo
Wang on His 70 th Birthday
Ovid J. L. Tzeng
Beyond the Zipf-Mandelbrot law in quantitative linguistics
M
A
Montemurro
Physica A
300
Zipf's word frequency law in natural language: A critical review and future directions
S
T
Piantadosi
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review
21
5
Applications and Explanations of Zipf's Law
D
M W
Powers
Proceedings of the Workshop on New Methods in Language Processing and Computational Natural Language Learning
the Workshop on New Methods in Language Processing and Computational Natural Language Learning
Zipf's data on the frequency of Chinese words Revised
R
Rousseau
Q
Zhang
Scientometrics
24
2
Lotka phenomenon in the words' syntactic distribution complexity
D
Wang
D
Zhu
Z
Su
Scientometrics
90
H
Yong
J
Peng
Chinese Lexicography
Oxford University Press
Selected Studies of the Principle of Relative Frequency in Language
G
K
Zipf
Harvard University Press
G
Zipf
