Introduction
This study focuses on Arashi ha Mujyō Monogatari ("The Tale of Transient Popular Kabuki Actor Arashi's Life"; 1688), a novel from the early modern Japanese literature, written by Saikaku Ihara . It is a first work of a Kabuki actor's life in Japan (Kabuki is a traditional stage arts performed exclusively by male actors with the accompaniment of live music and songs). Then we will examine the "authorship problem" in Saikaku's works using the tools of quantitative analysis.
Saikaku was a national author whose novels were published in 17th century. Saikaku's works are known for their significance for developing Japanese contemporary novels. One recent hypothesis has stated that he wrote twenty-four novels, however, it remained unclear which works were really written by Saikaku except Kōshoku ichidai otoko ("The Life of an Amorous Man"; 1682), Shōen Ōkagami ("The Great Mirror of Female Beauty"; 1684), Kōshoku ichidai onna ("The Life of an Amorous Woman"; 1686), Kōshoku gonin onna ("Love Stories about Five Women"; 1686). Although the study of his works has continued, these fundamental doubts about his authorship remain.
Meanwhile, the potential of quantitative analysis of textual data and the related field of the digital humanities have also dramatically advanced. However, quantitative analysis of Japanese classical works has been behind. It has been a problem due to complications regarding development of morphological analysis software and also delayed digitalization of Japanese classical works.
Previous Studies
Found by Noma in 1941
Noma found and introduced Arashi ha Mujyō Monogatari in 1941. He mentioned that the novel was actually written by Saikaku, for the following reasons
(Noma, 1941 and
1964)
.
(1)
The handwriting of the novel belongs to Saikaku; and (2) He found a similar writing error in Arashi ha Mujyō Monogatari and Saikaku's work.
Arguments for Saikaku's authorship The handwriting is not crucial in deciding if they are Saikaku's novels. According to
Emoto et al. (1996)
, among his twenty-four novels, the handwriting of nineteen works does not belong to Saikaku.
Moreover, Saikaku made a fair copy of other writer's draft such as Kindai Yasa Inja ("The story of a hermit"; 1686) by Kyōsen Sairoken (? -?) and Shin Yoshiwara Tsurezure ("The book of commentary on the licensed quarters of a certain area"; 1689) by Sutewaka Isogai (? -?).Mori (1955) has argued that Saikaku's novels are an apocryphal work mainly written by Dansui Hōjō (1663-1711) except Kōshoku ichidai otoko.
As he gained a national audience, Saikaku was pressured to write on demand and in great volume. At first he wrote only one or two novels a year, however in the two years from 1687 to 1688 he published twelve books, with a total of sixty-two volumes. Saikaku's style and approach also changed at this point
(Shirane, 2004)
.
It is possible that Saikaku had some assistance
(Nakamura,1969)
. Arashi ha Mujyō Monogatari was published in this period. Moreover, Arashi ha Mujyō Monogatari does not have a preface, epilogue, signature, namely it is not specified that it was written by Saikaku. Despite the authorship problem of Arashi ha Mujyō Monogatari remains unanswered, little work has been done about it. For that reason, this study reexamines the authorship of Arashi ha Mujyō Monogatari using a quantitative approach.
Databases
Database of Saikaku's Works First, we digitized all the text of 120 works of Saikaku (24 novels, 80 poem books, etc.) based on the first edition of each works (see
Figure 1)
. Second, Since Japanese sentences are not separated by spaces, we built the rule with early modern Japanese researchers, who were editors of Shinpen Saikaku Zenshu ("The new complete works of Saikaku"). Finally, based on this rule, we added spaces between the words in all of the sentences. In addition, the grammatical categories' information was added. According to our database, there are 710,355 words contained in his 120 works.
Analysis and Results
In our previous studies, we have analyzed Saikaku and Dansui's novels, and have clarified the following two points by extracting their writing style using principal component analysis (PCA) and cluster analysis (hierarchical clustering): (1) A comparison of the Saikaku and Dansui's novels showed ten prominent features: the grammatical categories, words, nouns, particles, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, adnominal adjectives, grammatical categories bigrams and particle bigrams
(Uesaka, 2015
(Uesaka, , 2016
; and (2) Using these features, we analyzed Saikaku's four posthumous novels (many researchers have raised questions about the authorship, because these novels were edited and published by Dansui after Saikaku's death). We found these four posthumous works indicated same features of Saikaku's novel, therefore we concluded that these four posthumous novels belonged to Saikaku
(Uesaka・ Murakami,2015ab, Uesaka, 2016
.
In this study, we compared Arashi ha Mujyō Monogatari to Saikaku and Dansui, as authenticated novels of them (see
Table 1
) by ten prominent features using PCA and cluster analysis to see the differences in each novels. The analysis revealed differences of writing style between Arashi ha Mujyō Monogatari, Saikaku and Dansui. We conducted PCA with correlation matrix and these novels fall into three groups: Saikaku, Dansui and Arashi ha Mujyō Monogatari (see
Figure 2)
. Furthermore, we conducted a cluster analysis. There also appears to be a considerable difference among Arashi ha Mujyō Monogatari, Saikaku and Dansui's novels. When calculating distances between each novels, we normalized the frequency of each words, and used the Kullback-Leibler divergence and the algorithm from the Ward method. Furthermore, we obtained similar result of the other nine features: the grammatical categories, words, nouns, particles, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, adnominal adjectives and particle bigrams.
Nishimura(?-1969)
. We have been building the database of these author's 13 novels, and we will do comparisons in the future study.
Figure 1 :
1
Figure 2 :
2
Table 1 : The authenticated novels of Saikaku and Dansui
1
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Professor Masakatsu Murakami, Professor Hidekazu Banno and Professor Takayuki Mizutani for their help on our research. This work was mainly supported by the Japanese Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) Grant-in-Aid for Research Activity Start-up(16H07328).
Bibliography
Emoto, Y. and Taniwaki, M.
(1996)
. Saikaku Jiten ("A Saikaku Dictionary"). Tokyo:Ouhu Publishing.
Mori, S.
(1955)
. Saikaku to Saikaku Bon ("Saikaku and Saikaku's Novel"). Tokyo:Motomotosha Publishing.
Nakamura, Y. (1969).Saikaku Nyumon("The Introduction of
Saikaku's Research"). In:Kokubungaku kaishaku to kansho(" Japanese literature-Explanation and Appreciation") 34(11). pp.10-25. Tokyo: Shibundo Publishing.
Noma,K. (1941). Arashi ha Mujyō Monogatari ("The Tale of
Transient Popular Kabuki Actor Arashi's LifeExplanation and Understaning"). In: Saikaku Shin Shinkō ("Saikaku New Article";1981). pp231-290. Tokyo:Iwanami Publishing.
Noma
