User Activity Analysis and Digital Humanities Research Processes
In fact, there is one field of research which addresses a comparable situation and this field is user activity analysis. In user activity analysis, humancomputer-interaction is recorded in order to evaluate the user with respect to a specific research interest. The approach is used in areas like e-commerce and online social networks research in order to create services like recommendation systems
(Plumbaum, Stelter, and Korth 2009)
or to analyze social behavior (
Dang et al. 2016)
. There are few examples of user activity analysis in academic digital environments.
Suire et al. (2016)
use this approach in the cultural heritage domain while
Vozniuk et al. (2016)
applies it to model learning processes in e-learning environments.
Having said that, no ready-made solution exists which can be easily used in the present context. Instead different approaches to user-activity analysis have to be evaluated in order to decide which ones can be adopted. Nevertheless, under the circumstances of evaluating digital research practices these decisions remain contingent. Digital research takes place in very different digital environments and under different conditions. Thus, in every situation in which digital research practice should be evaluated a different selection from the existing set of options might be the best. An overview of these options will be published in a DARIAH-DE report in the future.
The advantage of the Wissensspeicher use-case is the fact that it is a web platform-most user activity analysis takes place on websites and in web environments. There are two major tasks which need to be distinguished. The first task is user activity tracking and concerns how the data is created. The second task is the actual analysis. It demands to evaluate in which sense the created data constitute meaningful events and how to make sense out of these events.
Use-Case: Wissensspeicher
The Wissensspeicher implements user activity tracking by combining three different strategies: httprequest logging, browser-event parsing and user annotations. Http-requests are logged by virtue of the Django request object and the logger library in the Python Django app that creates the website. Thereby request information can be pre-processed when it is detected. When a page is loaded in the browser a JavaScript client registers event listeners for page elements and certain user actions. Each event that is triggered causes the client to parse relevant information in the DOM of the HTML including microdata which has been created in the Django app in advance. Additionally, the user is able to directly give feedback in some situations. The created data is stored in a MongoDB database.
User activity analysis is also realized by virtue of three steps. In a certain way these steps resemble the three angles of workflow, provenance and lineage. First, events are evaluated in a so called task model. This task model describes ideal sequences of actions and user goals as conceived by the project employees. Second, users are evaluated by applying the thinking aloud technique from the field of usability testing. Finally, existing data will be evaluated to identify common event sequences by computing its clusters. A systematization of the results from these evaluations will enables researchers to associate certain meanings with events in such a way that the data can be analyzed to permit insights into research practices within the use case.
A Dialogue of Approaches
This presentation will summarize activities to evaluate research practices and methods in the digital humanities. It will outline a unique and complementary approach and indicate how this approach can be used in conjunction with existing digital humanities research practices. Finally, the implementation and results will be described up to the point that such results are present after two-thirds of the project time has elapsed.
Bibliography
Constantopoulos, P., Dallas, C., and
Bernadou, A. (2016)
. "Digital Methods in the Humanities: Understanding and Describing Their Use Across the Disciplines." In A New Companion to Digital Humanities, edited by Susan Schreibman, Ray Siemens, and
What Is in a Rumour: Combined Visual Analysis of Rumour Flow and User Activity
A
Dang
A
Moh&apos;d
E
Milios
R
Minghim
Proceedings of the 33rd Computer Graphics International
the 33rd Computer Graphics International
ACM
S
Gradmann
S
Hennicke
G
Tschumpel
K
Dill
K
Thoden
A
Pichler
C
Morbidoni
Beyond Infrastructure! Modelling the Scholarly Domain
Scientific Models: A User-Oriented Approach to the Integration of Scientific Data and Digital Libraries
J
Hunter
2006
Semantic Web Usage Mining: Using Semantics to Understand User Intentions
T
Plumbaum
T
Stelter
A
Korth
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-02247-0_42
User Modeling, Adaptation, and Personalization
Geert-Jan Houben, Gord McCalla, Fabio Pianesi, and Massimo Zancanaro
Berlin Heidelberg
Springer
5535
User Activity Characterization in a Cultural Heritage Digital Library System
C
Suire
A
Jean-Caurant
V
Courboulay
J.-C
Burie
P
Estraillier
Proceedings of the 16th ACM/IEEE-CS on Joint Conference on Digital Libraries
the 16th ACM/IEEE-CS on Joint Conference on Digital Libraries
ACM
Combining Content Analytics and Activity Tracking to Identify User Interests and Enable Knowledge Discovery
A
Vozniuk
M
J
Rodriguez-Triana
A
Holzer
D
Gillet
Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Personalization Approaches in Learning Environments (PALE 2016). 24th conference on User Modeling, Adaptation, and Personalization (UMAP 2016), CEUR workshop proceedings
the 6th Workshop on Personalization Approaches in Learning Environments (PALE 2016). 24th conference on User Modeling, Adaptation, and Personalization (UMAP 2016), CEUR workshop proceedings
this volume
