The project not only makes a muchneglected part of Canadian history available for mainstream scholarly use, it also provides a foundation for modeling identity and representing time and space in TEI. There is much to model spatially and temporally. In the 1960s, the Toronto's gay scene was located on Yonge Street and by the 1970s the bars had migrated north along Yonge from Queen Street towards Wellesley Street. Two of the most famous bars on this strip were the Parkside at 530 Yonge Street and the St. Charles Tavern at 488 Yonge Street, both owned by
Norman Bolter. The neighbourhood surrounding the former sites of the Parkside and the St. Charles is currently a site of massive development. Gone are the seedy bars and massage parlours. Large glass condos are rising from bulldozed lots and from the tops of heritage buildings.
The building that housed the St. Charles Tavern still stands above Yonge Street at Wellesley. It is slated to become a condo in 2017, the iconic clock tower that served for decades as a meeting spot for the gay community will be preserved at the base of a proposed 153 metre glass spire. The incorporation of this piece of gay history into a shining skyscraper only furthers serves the ideology that scapegoats the gay community as the root cause of gentrification, making the million dollar condos imagined by a developer seem like an inevitability, rather than just one potential future amongst many. What is lost in this new instance of facadism is the history of the St. Charles Tavern, a violent history neither the city nor developers seem keen to acknowledge or commemorate.
For example, tracing the events outside the St. Charles Tavern on Halloween from 1968 to 1981 reveals Toronto's violently homophobic history, and the inadequate policy and police response to that violence. In the 1960s it was illegal for men to wear clothing of the opposite sex in Toronto, a rule that was relaxed at Halloween. Every Halloween St. Charles Tavern hosted a drag show, and every year a homophobic mob congregated outside the bar to throw eggs and rotten vegetables as the queens arrived. In 1968, police found gasoline bombs behind the tavern, and yet in the following years police still permitted crowds to hurl insults shout slogans such as "kill the queers", and throw debris at the patrons. It took a decade for the police to start arresting people in the mob; in the meantime a volunteer gay defense patrol, Operation Jack O'Lantern, escorted patrons through the neighbourhood and in through the back door of the tavern.
Between 1975 and
1978, 14
patrons of Toronto's gay bar scene were murdered. Eight of those murders went unsolved amid accusations of police homophobia, which were only exacerbated by homophobic articles published in the Toronto Police Association Journal. Publishing this history online, not only in text, but in map form, will make it accessible to an audience that will include not just scholars, but the citizens of Toronto. By developing accompanying pedagogical tools to guide users through the map, we hope to engage local residents, as well as the thousands of students at nearby universities and schools, in working to reclaim that lost history, and undoing some of the effects of the gentrification of the mind.
