American Lynching: Uncovering a Cultural Narrative, by
Andrew Bales. This site explores America's long, dark history of lynching and the role of newspapers as both catalysts for killings and platforms for reform.
Historical Agricultural News, by Amy Giroux, Marcy
Galbreath, and Nathan Giroux. The site is a tool for exploring information on farming organizations, technologies, and practices, as a window into social, economic, and political history.
Chronicling Hoosier, by Kristi Palmer, Caitlin Pollock, and Ted Polley. This site tracks the origins of the word "Hoosier," its geographic distribution, and its positive and negative connotations over time.
USNewsMap.com, by Claudio Saunt and Trevor
Goodyear. This site allows users to discover patterns, explore regions, and investigate how words, terms, and news spread.
Digital APUSH, by Ray Palin and the A.P. U.S. History Students at Sunapee High School. This class used word frequency analysis to discover patterns in news coverage of several major issues such as secession, the KKK, and Plessy v. Ferguson. This paper illustrates the potential impact of humanities collections such as Chronicling America when their data are made freely and easily available. It describes the data available in this huge data repository, the mechanisms researchers and students can use to access it, and some of the challenges inherent in its large span. The paper addresses some of the technical specifications and program guidelines for the National Digital Newspaper Program, in which metadata standards for both access and preservation were primary concerns for the NEH and the Library of Congress in creating and maintaining the program. It also explains how the program's decade-old community has cultivated shared practices and specifications that contribute both to the longevity of this dataset and to other newspaper digitization efforts across the country.
Then, the paper gives information about the winning entries in the first Chronicling America Historic American Newspapers Data Challenge in 2016, which touched on a variety of important humanities themes like religion, race, literature, violence, agriculture, law, and geography. It explains how winners used cutting-edge technology to produce maps, visualizations, tools, and data mashups. Winners reported their initial questions, the importance of this data in answering them, their methods, and their future plans for the projects they built. This paper highlights their processes and the variety of results they produced.
Finally, the paper discusses broader lessons for humanities users of "big data" in Chronicling America. It shows the value of a contest in publicizing data in the humanities and its uses. It showcases different modes of collaboration among humanities researchers, libraries, information technology professionals, and other partners in the research endeavor. The paper also explores some of the challenges for humanities scholars working with large datasets, including representation, bias, categorization, and documentation. The intellectual work of the digital humanities projects described here involves the same problem identifying and research that humanists have always pursued, but the methods and investigation present new questions and opportunities. The paper suggests ways of maximizing the benefits of large datasets such as Chronicling America to the humanities.
