in the Film and
Video Makers Travel Sheet (data from 26 artists residing in New York City and New York state). In the above image, the artists' home address is represented in blue while the event location is represented in orange (the event locations are sized according to the number of events, 99 total). This visualization demonstrates the connections between organizations and individuals emerging from the data in the Travel Sheet. Here we can see the beginnings of a network that extends beyond the United States and into Europe and Canada. As data entry and analysis continues, the data promises to demonstrate a global network of artists and media arts organizations as a sample from the 1979 Film and Video Makers' Directory illustrates, below. While the term network was the preferred terminology of the Media Arts Center Movement, this is an overly simplistic understanding that masks the complexity of the MIMC data. Anthropologist Tim Ingold argues that the lines of a network are connectors, static points joining two nodes, that presume an absolute connection that does not fully illustrate the complexity of the relationship. In contrast, Ingold offers the concept of the meshwork, suggesting that these lines are not connectors, but the "lines of becoming" from Deluze and Guattari's rhizome
(Ingold, 2013: 132)
. These lines do not meet - the nodes in the network map instead represent knots and entanglements in the meshwork, places where lines emerge and diverge rather than connecting in absolutes. The meshwork, like the rhizome, affords multiple narratives and entry points; it offers no hierarchy or structure. MIMC seeks to offer this alternative mapping of the meshwork -the entanglements between artists, distributors, museums, governmental bodies, local communities, and countless other actors in the fabric of the independent media arts.
Unlike other digital humanities approaches to cinema and media history, like Jeffrey Klenotic's Mapping Movies, MIMC provides access not only to a representation of the history of the independent media arts, but access to the archives that hold these traces as well.
The MIMC data model includes the provenance for each discrete data point in the database, linking individual records back to the primary source material from which it was derived. These connections will afford opportunities to link directly to the digital archives that hold the digital surrogates as these records, allowing MIMC to serve as an extension of these archival collections as a digital finding aid of sorts. In this way, MIMC is enfolded in the archives; the project does not derive-from but is entangled-with the archival organizations and other sites that hold the history that MIMC seeks to represent, continuing to build the meshwork that entangles the various organizations and individuals represented in the visualizations. In locating and documenting these archival traces, MIMC provides an understanding not only of the historical unfolding of the independent media arts and Media Arts Center Movement, but of the archivalization of this history as well - the project itself becoming further enmeshed and entangled in the very history that it seeks to uncover.
This brief paper will introduce the MIMC project and discuss the development of the MIMC application as well as the potential impact of the project as a Public Digital Humanities resource for scholars and for the archives that collect and provide access to the primary source materials from which the MIMC data is derived. In addition to the database and visualizations, by preserving the source information for each record and linking to the digitized archival records (or archival finding aids), MIMC links the archive of the independent media arts that is distributed across archives, personal collections, the active and inactive organizations that are part of this vast meshwork. While there is still much work to be done, MIMC promises to provide widespread access to historical data that can be reused and re-imagined beyond the initial bounds of the project.
Bibliography
Figure 1 :
1
Figure 2 :
2
Ingold, T.( 2013 ).
2013
