Structure of the Workshop
Part 1: Visual programming, workflows, data input and preprocessing First, we will show the basics of Orange: how to load the data, inspect and visualize it. Participants will be introduced to several options for data import, from standard Corpus to Twitter, Guardian and Text Import. Once the corpus is loaded, we will preprocess it and display the result in a word cloud. A particular emphasis will be on the use of custom preprocessing techniques and how to successfully apply them to the corpus. The results of each technique will be observed in an interactive word cloud and concordances. Next, we will use Twitter data to construct an author prediction pipeline and test some classifiers. We will fetch author Timelines from Twitter and observe the retrieved corpus. This time we will introduce a pre-trained tweet tokenizer and pass the preprocessed corpus through a bag of words. We will discuss bag of words parameters and how to best prepare the data for further analysis. The results of using different parameters will be observed in a data table to understand the underlying data structures. For comparison, we will use deep-learning-based embedding to derive vector representation of tweets and in this way enable machine learning.
We will explain how we can use machine learning in text mining and introduce a number of techniques for predictive analysis. We will use cross-validation to test the constructed bag of words models and compare classification scores for each algorithm. We will discuss the quality of constructed models and what scores are usually the best for observing model quality. Additionally, we will inspect misclassified tweets in a confusion matrix and even further in Corpus Viewer, to leverage the possibilities of a close(r) reading.
Part 3: Data clustering, sentiment analysis, image and geo analytics
In the third part, we will work on geomapping and image analytics. We will transform textual and visual data into feature vectors and plot these data onto a world map to discover interesting relations.
We will discuss how to acquire geolocated data from Twitter and why this is useful. Next, we will use geotagged Twitter data and apply a pre-trained sentiment analysis model to acquire sentiment orientation. We will map the sentiment-tagged tweets and explore how to use sentiment together with geomapping.
Finally, the participants will be introduced to image analytics for humanities research. We will explain why and how to transform raw images into multidimensional vectors and how to work with the new data. We will cluster Instagram images into groups and explore how to map image-containing tweets on a world map. Do images correspond to geolocation? We will see.
Figure 1 :
1
Figure 2 :
2
