Research context
In the last fifteen years several studies have proposed models for evaluating the impact of digital resources (
Warwick et al., 2006;
Meyer et al., 2009;
Tanner, 2012)
. Citation analysis is commonly used in impact evaluation, and is a well-established bibliometric technique for impact analysis
(MacRoberts and MacRoberts, 1989)
. As part of the wider field of bibliometrics, citation analysis has been used to judge the impact of academic publications and digital resources
(Meyer et al., 2009)
. Citations are proxy measures of how frequently a document or resource is used, founded on the assumption that there is a strong positive correlation between the number of citations that a resource or article attracts, and the quality of that resource
(Smith, 1980)
. The reality, though, is that citation practices are not always followed or understood by academics.
Smith (1980)
noted several reasons a scholar may choose not to cite a document: inability to obtain the document; inability to read a foreign language; lack of relevance to their work; or lack of awareness of existing work. There are further reasons for digital resources; not least a lack of awareness of how to cite them (Sukovic, 2009), and disciplinary unwillingness to acknowledge their usage
(Meyer, 2009)
. As a result, the traditional method of mining only citations provide an unreliable picture of citation levels of digital resources.
Furthermore, there is a need to account for the varied local and national context within which researchers operate. In Canada, for instance, there is a feeling among scholars that the "limited and fragmented"
(Kheraj, 2014)
newspaper digitisation programme lags behind nations such as the USA, Australia and United Kingdom. The prominence of The Toronto Star and The Globe and Mail mirrors the early years of newspaper digitisation in the United Kingdom, where the ubiquity of the Times Digital Archive encouraged some to overstate its representativeness
(Bingham, 2010)
. Contemporary digitised newspaper resources in the UK by contrast, tend to aggregate dozens of newspaper titles into a single resource. This paper therefore explores the likelihood that this aggregation process may have caused different citation patterns among UK researchers, who are the largest group to access these resources
(Gooding, 2014)
, providing a comparison with the differing Canadian context presented by Milligan.
Methodology
To achieve this, I will focus on newspaper titles from two British Library resources: British Library Nineteenth Century Newspapers (BNCN) and The British Newspaper Archive (BNA). I intend to identify mentions of newspapers by title within the full text of UK history theses. The dataset comes from EThOS, a national service which makes UK doctoral theses available online for searching and reading. EThOS contains approximately 440,000 records relating to theses awarded by over 120 institutions. It provides a comprehensive, systematically collected dataset for comparison of citation trends over time. Around 160,000 records provide access to searchable full text, and I have worked with British Library Labs to identify a subset of history theses published from 1999 to 2015; in total, over 6,000 theses were identified using Dewey Decimal Classifiers, covering eight years before and after the launch of BNCN in 2007. These theses will be searched using Natural Language Processing techniques to identify the incidence of specific newspaper titles that are included in BNCN and BNA, allowing me to identify how many theses use a given source, and how frequently each source was used.
This project also acts as a test case for text mining of British Library collections. In 2014, the UK government introduced an exception to copyright law to ensure that researchers undertaking text and data-mining for non-commercial purposes would no longer infringe copyright
(Intellectual Property Office, 2014
), without requiring that publishers took steps to guarantee the availability of suitable datasets for text mining. In reality, this means that there are many potentially valuable data sources that could be legally studied, but no infrastructure to do so. Starting with the British Library's PhD thesis holdings, I intend to work with British Library Labs to explore the possibility of opening up further datasets for text mining.
Conclusion
This paper will explore the ways in which historical newspaper digitisation have impacted upon historiography among early career researchers in the United Kingdom, by tracking citations of digitised newspaper titles over time in the full text of over 6,000 PhD theses. This is the first study to apply text mining of digital resource citations to the UK context. It also provides an important case study of text and data mining in legal deposit library collections, in the light of current limitations to the UK copyright exception. In doing so, this project will not only illuminate the ways in which digital resources can affect local research practices, but will demonstrate the utility of text mining in addressing the methodological limitations of citation analysis for digital resources. We must adopt new computational methods to ensure that the traces of this use are not wiped away by citation practices which continue to de-emphasise the role of digital resources in contemporary research.
Warwick, C., Terras, M., Pappa, N. and Galina, I. (2006). The LAIRAH project: log analysis of digital resources in the arts and humanities -Final report to the Arts and Humanities Research Council. School of Library, Archive
and Information Studies, University College London. http://www.ucl.ac.uk/infostudies/claire-warwick/publications/LAIRAHreport.pdf.
The Digitization of Newspaper Archives: Opportunities and Challenges for Historians
A
Bingham
doi:10.1093/tcbh/hwq007
Twentieth Century British History
21
Opium: The Diary of His Cure
J
Cocteau
Peter Owen Publishers
London
3rd Edition
