Discovery
A major challenge facing scholarship online is that a vast number of digital resources, particularly those produced independently by scholars or smaller institutions, do not have standardized metadata records and are not accessible via any centralized scientific index. GH-D involves development of a peer-reviewed index of scholarly digital objects using Dublin Core (DC) and CLARIN's Component MetaData Infrastructure (CMDI) standards via a customized Blacklight technology stack.
Preservation
For scholars developing historical digital projects in North America, there exists no inter-institutional infrastructure for preserving their data and making it openly available. With consultative and knowledge support from CLARIN-D, which is part of the European research infrastructure CLARIN, the GH-D project will establish the first portal to CLARIN in North America at GHI Washington. Central to this process is the implementation of a repository that allows a sustainable storage of the content and the inclusion in a digital environment to ease access, search and an interoperable data formats. The content of the repository and the repository itself adheres to international, widely accepted and supported standards. The high quality of the technical solution and the conformance to standards is secured by an independent organization that gives out the Data Seal of Approval. Like the majority of CLARIN centres in Germany, the GH-D will use a Fedora Commons repository with Apache Solr for indexing and search, components included in the technology stack of Project Hydra. Our partnership with CLARIN promotes open access, open science and knowledge co-creation in the North American context, and is an important component in the overall digital humanities research strategy of the GHI. As an institute of the Max Weber Stiftung, we are also in partnership with DARIAH-DE and arrangements have been made for DARIAH to provide long term preservation of GHI digital projects in their entirety, beginning with the first edition of German History in Documents and Images. Beginning with the GHDI project, GH-D is part of the DARIAH-DE Service Lifecycle program.
Production and Publication
As a knowledge co-creation platform, GH-D will bring together editors, researchers and citizen scientists in the development of innovative online projects. Three such pilot projects are currently in development based on customization, including support for TEI, and internationalization of the Scalar 2.0 platform. GH-D is using Scalar 2.0 for the baseline content management system, particularly on account of its interface features, support for RDF, connectivity to external repositories, Dublin Core support. Hypothes.is integration, and its multiple path navigation system.
Analysis
Historians are increasingly using digital humanities tools to analyze data and express their research findings. A further advantage of storing digital objects within the CLARIN repository the GHI wants to built up is that the full range of corpus linguistic analytic tools of CLARIN can be applied by scientists to GHI textual content. During the first phase of the project we also look to prototyping connectivity to PARTHENOS, another major European infrastructure project. PAR-THENOS integrates within a virtual research environment (VRE) access to data from numerous national archives and a broad set of digital tools which can be chained together into analytic processing workflows.
Community
The GH-D platform integrates blog aggregation, an advanced discussion system, community-oriented tools, and social media, to facilitate collaborative knowledge communities and open research. This is a pioneering aspect of our project that will investigate the adoption by historians of social and community digital tools in their research activities. We also intend to make use of the unique role the GHI plays as a hub of transatlantic scholarly dialogue and a major knot within an international network of historians in order to facilitate connections between different scholarly communities.
