In November 2014 a consortium of universities and research centers associated with the European Digital Research Infrastructure for the Arts and Humanities (DARIAH-EU) received an ERAMUS+ grant to establish a strategic partnership in digital humanities teaching. As part of the 30-months grant, Aarhus University (Denmark), the Austrian Academy of Sciences, the Athena Research Center (Greece), the Belgrade Center for Digital Humanities (Serbia), Erasmus University Rotterdam (Netherlands), the Maynooth University (Ireland), and the University of Lausanne (Switzerland) will build an extensible, open-source, and open-access reference curriculum platform and develop modules to promote multilingual DH education. Our poster will present an overview of the project and the results of the first six months of the grant period. The project started on 1 January 2015.
The DARIAH Reference Curriculum (DARIAH-RC) project builds upon previous initiatives to develop and deliver a model for open-source asynchronous online educational materials from which a wide variety of communities of practice can benefit.
The training materials will be designed as building blocks tailored to the exigencies of teaching situations and will be based on a format that allows easy localization and adaptation (via translation, subtitles, domain-specific examples, etc.). The language of all the materials will be English, with translations or subtitles (as appropriate) in the language of the partner-country that will develop specific modules. Moreover, the modules are being developed across multiple disciplines, genres, and formats, including text images, moving images, and sound.
The training materials will present content in various degrees of complexity, allowing for use and re-use at different levels and different modalities of education: from formal classroom settings, to professional development in the form of workshops and summer schools, to nonformal individual learners wishing to improve their skills.
The direct result of the partnership during the grant period will be the first multilingual collection of DH training materials that is freely available and openly accessible. By embedding and promoting localization principles to the field of DH education and by fostering multilingualism—not only theoretically, but also practically—this partnership will make a significant new contribution to the internationalization of the digital humanities landscape.
In addition to being directly accessible through our custom-built web platform, the materials will also be hosted by the French national repository HAL, which is maintained by DARIAH-FR (at the joint service unit CCSD of CNRS, Inria, and University of Lyon).
The expertise of project and partner countries will be leveraged in the DARIAH-RC project by situating the digital humanities curriculum development in the wider European landscape of digital resources and digital cultural heritage, so that participating institutions start building strategic alliances across disciplinary boundaries.
Bibliography
Brier, S.
(2012). Where’s the Pedagogy? The Role of Teaching and Learning in the Digital Humanities. In Gold, M. K. (ed.).,
Debates in the Digital Humanities
. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Clement, T.
(2012). Multiliteracies in the Undergraduate Digital Humanities Curriculum: Skills, Principles, and Habits of Mind. In Hirsch, B. D. (ed.),
Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics
. Cambridge, UK: Open Book Publishers.
Ives, M.
(2014). Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Hitting the Wall and Bouncing Back.
CEA Critic,
76
(2) (July).
Rockwell, G. and Sinclair, S.
(2012). Acculturation and the Digital Humanities Community. In Hirsch, B. D. (ed.),
Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics
. Cambridge, UK: Open Book Publishers.
TEI By Example
. (n.d.). http://www.teibyexample.org/.
Walzer, L.
(2012). Digital Humanities and the ‘Ugly Stepchildren’ of American Higher Education. In Gold, M. K. (ed.).,
Debates in the Digital Humanities
. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
