Computing capabilities for rendering high-quality three-dimensional graphics have progressed remarkably in recent years, largely in response to competition in the gaming and defense industries. While public awareness and engagement with virtual reality (VR) and/or augmented reality (AR) platforms has risen sharply, scholars are taking a measured and thoughtful approach, engaging with the new technology while remaining meta-critical about how high-speed computational capabilities like 3D, VR and AR can effectively represent the multiple dimensions in their digital humanities research.
A
n increasing number of m
ultidimensional projects by digital humanities scholars focus on the modeling and simulation of real, historical physical spaces, and/or the articulation of imaginary or data-derived spaces for pedagogy and research in the humanities. A common thread of the use of three-dimensional representations and techniques is that they are at once both extremely complex and stunningly intuitive, both to render
and
to interpret. The same paradoxicality can be said of some aspects of digital humanities research. Using algorithms to approach questions of subjectivity and distance, employing visualization to explore voice and genre, and leveraging the virtual to explore the real, multidimensional scholarship likewise applies the rigid logic of computation to understand deeply subjective aspects of the human experience, in
an immersive application of "thick mapping" (c.f. Presner et al 2014)
. The ability for DH to flourish while comprising such internal contradictions suggests the capabilities of multidimensional technology to distill and refine the essential points of complexity by articulating them in those dimensions. In this manner, multidimensional scholarship seeks to reveal the underlying essence of DH projects by employing rich, deep and immersive experiences in pedagogy, data visualization, modeling and simulation.
This panel brings a diverse host of scholars together to demonstrate and discuss their exploration of three-dimensionality, including virtual and augmented reality, in Digital Humanities research. Rachel Hendery and Kate Richards, of Western Sydney University, will describe their group’s experiences of co-designing virtual reality and other 3D experiences with members of Australian First Peoples’ communities, Steven Jones of the University of South Florida at Tampa will present on his research and simulation of
the first dedicated humanities computing center
. Amanda Licastro will discuss her work in critiquing and building VR applications with undergraduate students. Micki Kaufman will show the results of her utilization of three-dimensional interactive spaces for data visualization and storytelling of the Kissinger Correspondence,
Angel David Nieves, of Yale University, will discuss the ways in which 3D historical reconstructions can be used as tools for the promotion of social justice advocacy in digital humanities.
In addition, Geoffrey Rockwell of the University of Alberta will report on recent experimentations with augmented reality and the role of play in pedagogy.
Bibliography
Anning, B. (2010). Embedding an Indigenous graduate attribute into University of Western Sydney's courses.
The Australian Journal of Indigenous Education
,
39
(S1), 40-52.
Foster, D., Williams, R., Campbell, D., Davis, V., & Pepperill, L. (2006). ‘Researching ourselves back to life’: new ways of conducting Aboriginal alcohol research.
Drug and alcohol review
,
25
(3), 213-217.
Heppell, M., & Wigley, J. J. (2017).
Black out in Alice: A history of the establishment and development of town camps in Alice Springs
. Canberra, ACT: Development Studies Centre, The Australian National University.
Kukutai, T., & Taylor, J. (Eds.). (2016).
Indigenous Data Sovereignty: Toward an Agenda
(Vol. 38). ANU Press.
Merlan, F. (2014). Recent rituals of Indigenous recognition in Australia: Welcome to country.
American Anthropologist
,
116
(2), 296-309.
Trescak, T., Esteva, M., & Rodriguez, I. (2010). A virtual world grammar for automatic generation of virtual worlds.
The Visual Computer
,
26
(6), 521-531.
NEH-funded project: Reconstructing The First Humanities Computing Center:
https://recaal.org
[to go live spring 2018].
 
Emerson, Lori. (2014).
Reading Writing Interfaces: From the Digital to the Bookboun
d. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
 
Kraus, Kari. (2012.) Introduction to
Rough Cuts: Media and Design in Process
:
http://mediacommons.futureofthebook.org/tne/pieces/introduction.
 
Parikka, Jussi. (2012). What Is Media Archaeology? Cambridge, UK: Polity.
 
Sayers, Jentery. (2015). “Kits for Cultural History.”
Hyperrhiz
13 (Fall 2015),
http://hyperrhiz.io/hyperrhiz13/workshops-kits/early-wearables-essay.html
.
Bowman, Denvey (2011). “The Empathy Experiment.” Capital University.
Davis, Mark H. (1983). “Measuring the Individual Differences in Empathy: Evidence for a Multidimensional Approach.”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.
Vol. 44, No. 1:113-126.
O’Brien, Ed,  Sara H. Konrath, Daniel Grühn, Anna Linda Hagen (2013). “Empathic Concern and Perspective Taking: Linear and Quadratic Effects of Age Across the Adult Life Span.”
The Journals of Gerontology: Series B
, Vol. 68, Issue 2: 168–175.
Galeazzia, Fabrizio, Marco Callieri, Matteo Dellepiane, Michael Charno, Julian Richards, and Roberto Scopigno (
2016). “Web-based visualization for 3D data in archaeology: The ADS 3D viewer.”
Journal of Archaeological Science Reports
vol. 9: 1-11.
Potenziani, Marco, Marco Callieri, Matteo Dellepiane, Massimiliano Corsini, Federico Ponchio, Roberto
Scopigno
(2015). “3DHOP: 3D Heritage Online Presenter.”
Computers & Graphics
52:129-141.
Risam, Roopika (2015). “Beyond the Margins: Intersectionality and the Digital Humanities.”
Digital Humanities Quarterly
vol. 9, no. 2.
Sullivan, Elaine, Angel D. Nieves, and Lisa M. Snyder (2017). “Making the Model: Scholarship and Rhetoric in 3D Historical Reconstructions.”
Making Things and Drawing Boundaries: Experiments in the Digital Humanities
. ed., Jentery Sayers. University of Minnesota Press.
Abt, Clark C. Serious Games. Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1987.
McGonigal, J. (2011). Reality is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better and How They Can Change the World. New York, Penguin.
Rockwell, G., K. Uszkalo, C. Henry, E. deJong, S. Lucky, M. Illovan, L. Gutierrez, S. Gouglas, P. Boechler and E. Stroulia. (2013) “Campus Mysteries: Serious Walking Around.” Vol. 7. No. 12. Loading... Winter 2013. http://journals.sfu.ca/loading/index.php/loading/article/view/115
Szulborski, David. This is Not A Game. Lulu, 2006.
