Virtual Workshop “TwinTalks 3: Understanding and Facilitating Collaboration in DH”
Workshop organisers:
Steven Krauwer, CLARIN ERIC / Utrecht University, steven@clarin.euDarja Fišer, CLARIN ERIC / SSHOC / University of Ljubljana, darja.fiser@ff.uni-lj.si
This workshop is a joint initiative of CLARIN ERIC (http://www.clarin.eu) and DARIAH ERIC (http://www.dariah.eu) , and is supported by the SSHOC project (https://sshopencloud.eu/)
Workshop website: https://www.clarin.eu/event/2020/twintalksdh2020
Abstract:
The main objective of the proposed workshop is to get a better understanding of the dynamics on the Digital Humanities work floor when researchers and professionals with different areas of competence work in tandem to solve humanities research questions, and to explore how education and training of both humanities scholars and of technical experts can help making collaboration across disciplines more efficient, effective and (where possible) more creative and innovative. The insights gained should help those involved in the education of humanities scholars with various levels of technical capabilities, as well as technical experts with and/or without the understanding of humanities research to develop better training programmes. To this end we invite (i) submissions by pairs (or teams) consisting of members with different skill sets, as well as (ii) submissions by educators with experience in cross-discipline training. An invited talk at the beginning and a round table discussion at the end will complete the program. Please note that the chosen workshop format with the open call for submissions is in line with common practice in many sub-disciplines of Digital Humanities, and serves to attract contributions from a wide range of disciplines and sub-disciplines of Digital Humanities in a broad sense, including Social Sciences and Cultural Heritage Studies.
Background:
Research in the Humanities in a very broad sense (including Cultural Heritage Studies and Social Sciences) can only truly benefit from new developments in technology if researchers and professionals with different capabilities team up. This situation is very similar to the hard sciences, where research is done in teams working on a specific problem, where everybody brings in his/her specific content and technical expertise and skills. Co-design, co-development and co-creation are the rule rather than the exception, and the proposers want to investigate how this could be facilitated in the disciplines mentioned above. In the rest of this proposal we will use the term humanities in the broad sense described above, and digital humanities to refer to humanities research using digital data and tools.
The proposed workshop is a follow-up of the first, successful TwinTalks workshop that took place on March 5 2019 at the Nordic DH conference in Copenhagen, and the second TwinTalks workshop to take place at the Nordic DH conference in Riga planned for March 2020, now postponed to October. Whereas in the first workshop the focus was on analysing what happened on the work floor from the perspective of the researchers, and on identifying possible obstacles for collaboration, in the follow-up workshops we have added a new perspective: that of the humanities or digital humanities educator who has experience in bridging the gap between humanities and technical skills. The programme will reflect this.
Objectives:
The main objective of the proposed workshop is to get a better understanding of the dynamics on the Digital Humanities work floor when researchers and professionals with different areas of competence work in tandem to solve humanities research questions, and to explore how education and training of both humanities scholars and technical experts can help making collaboration across disciplines more efficient, effective and (where possible) more creative and innovative. What does it mean to pose a research question in the humanities that is technically tractable and how does it change our understanding of interpretative work? Conversely, is there room for creativity in the application of technical tools and what are the limitations? How can we ensure that have the same understanding of the research question to be answered and of the technical (im)possibilities?
The insights gained should help those involved in the education of humanities scholars, professionals and technical experts alike to develop better training programmes, tailored towards the needs of a diverse group of potential learners.
Audience:
Researchers, professionals, educators, and Research Infrastructure operators with a special interest in creating the conditions where people with humanities research skills and technical expertise (or both) can fruitfully collaborate in answering humanities research questions.
Originally proposed format (pre-COVID-19):
The programme starts with an invited talk by a prominent speaker, which will set the scene for the rest of the day.
The main component of the workshop programme consists of two types of (submitted) talks:
Twin talks, i.e. talks presented by pairs consisting of someone rooted primarily in humanities research (with a humanities research problem, i.e. not a technical problem or tool) and someone with a more technical background who has contributed technical capabilities to arrive at the answers. Talks consist of three parts, followed by questions from the audience. In the first part the humanities research question is the point of focus, while in the second part the technical aspects of the research are highlighted. In the third part these perspectives come together, as the team describes how the collaboration went, including obstacles that were encountered, and how better training and education could help to make collaboration more efficient and effective.Teach talks, i.e. talks by people with experience or interesting ideas about how cross-discipline collaboration is or can be addressed in curricula or other training activities.
The final component of the programme, which makes the event a workshop rather than a mini-conference, is a round table discussion between speakers, invited experts and the audience to discuss and analyse the findings of the talks, and to formulate conclusions and recommendations for developing better training programmes.
Revised format:
Due to the coronavirus the DH2020 conference will go virtual, and so will the TwinTalks 3 workshop. This has consequences for the format.
The duration of the virtual workshop will be 2 hours, and it will have an interactive, panel-like format, with short pitches (duration dependent on number of accepted talks). The Twin Talk pitches should briefly describe (i) the research problem addressed, (ii) its solution, including the technical aspects, (iii) a report on the collaboration experience itself, including obstacles encountered and (iv) recommendations how better training and education could help to make collaboration more efficient and effective.
The Teach Talks should briefly describe (i) the collaboration settings on which they are based, (ii) the approach adopted, and (iii) recommendations.
After the talks there will be a discussion with all participants to formulate the lessons learned from the presentations, and to identify further steps that could be taken.
Reading material and expected learning outcomes:
The workshop is a follow-up to a successful first Twin Talks workshop at DHN2019 in Copenhagen (https://www.clarin.eu/event/2019/twintalksdhn2019) and a workshop to take place at DNH2020 in Riga (moved to October 2020), where the scene for the discussion of this topic was set.
Reading material:
Participants are requested to read the proceedings of the DHN2019 workshop (http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2365/)and Mikko Tolonen’s invited talk at this workshop “Why humanities research questions should come first? Reflections on different kinds of collaboration in digital history” (see https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1tXWyJPj47VyUQlHWRrhjQnsXSQuW-bY2QYkvpXYJFUw/edit)
Learning outcomes:
Recommendations for university and other curricula, and for strategies to disseminate themPossible next steps for concrete actions
Revised time schedule:
Monday, July 6th: Submission deadline for short abstractsFriday, July 10th: NotificationWorkshop date and time to be announced laterTuesday, September 8th: Submission deadline for extended abstracts
International workshop programme committee (for peer review of submissions and composition of the final programme):
Bente Maegaard (CLARIN ERIC / University of Copenhagen, Denmark)Eleni Gouli (Academy of Athens, Greece)Franciska de Jong (CLARIN ERIC / SSHOC / Utrecht University, Netherlands)Frank Fischer (DARIAH ERIC / SSHOC / Higher School of Economics, Moscow)Frank Uiterwaal (NIOD – KNAW, Netherlands)Jennifer Edmond (DARIAH / SSHOC / Trinity College Dublin, Ireland)Koenraad De Smedt (University of Bergen, Norway / CLARINO)Krister Lindén (University of Helsinki, Finland / FIN-CLARIN)Maciej Maryl (Polish Academy of Sciences, Poland)Maria Gavrilidou (SSHOC / ILSP – Athena RC, Athens, Greece)Radim Hladik (Academy of Sciences, Czech Republic)Ulrike Wuttke (RDMO / University of Applied Sciences Potsdam, Germany)
