In recent decades European libraries have taken a giant step towards the mass digitization of their historical collections and the opening of their contents for the use of the global digital society. However, researchers and teachers experience great difficulties using, enriching or sharing that content. Our project aims to explore the new needs of the users of European digital libraries, databases and repositories in order to evolve the “traditional digital model” towards the
SmartLibrary
model, which proposes the compilation, integration and downloading of contents according to the needs of users and in order to enrich the European uses of the history.
Mnemosyne,
for the ancient Greeks, was the personification of Memory. In our project the concept of memory comprises two uses:
1)
The recovery of historical memory
through European texts we consider rare and forgotten. We will analyse these concepts as conceptual categories in cultural studies (Alonso, 2008; Romero Lopez, 2014). This new paradigm will cover the analysis of a large and complex network of literary manifestations. We aim to record the history of the losers, looking for it in popular and mass culture texts that have been marginalized until now (Labanyi, 2003). This recovery requires making those digitized texts accessible and bringing together their interpretations so that the axes that have governed their oblivion within European cultures can be underlined.
2)
The rewriting of historical memory
. Once we have compared texts digitized in the
Scriptorium
, researchers and teachers will begin an enrichment of these texts through their collaborative annotation. This reinterpretation will allow historical memory to be restored by setting new categories of knowledge for the understanding of European cultures under common tendencies.
The prefix
SMART
- has been used as synonymous to agility, safety, ecology and sharing (Doran, 1981). It is a prefix that has been applied to phones, cars, houses and cities. So far, it has not been applied to libraries. The creation of a European
SmartLibrary
implies:
S
imple access to integrated European databases on contemporary and alternative European literatures
M
otivational search based on specific research content or didactic objects
A
ppropriate results based on the semantic Web search
R
esults discharged in a personal
Scriptorium
to be enriched with the specific tools
T
ransference of new digital objects to be shared with the global community
As a “smart digital model”, exportable to other areas of the digital humanities, we have been developing
Mnemosyne: A SmartLibrary for Rare and Forgotten Texts
, based on the research that the LEETHI, LOEP and ILSA (see below) research groups in the Faculties of Philology and Information Technology of the Complutense University of Madrid (Spain) are jointly developing. Thanks to the collaboration of specialists in different European literatures and computer experts in the course of several national research projects, we have designed a new model of
Scriptorium
which allows for the integration of metadata and the enrichment of digital objects with new tools such as
Clavy
–an import/export tool for metadata- and
@Note
– a collaborative annotation tool.
About
Mnemosyne. Digital Library of the Other Silver Age
(Beta version):
1.-
Mnemosyne. Digital Library of the Other Age of Silver
is already accessible
on the Internet (http://repositorios.fdi.ucm.es/mnemosine/). As you can see
Mnemosyne
contains authors’ data, access to digitized works and research collections. The field of study is rare and forgotten Spanish literary texts (1868-1939). The work is still in progress. Our current project ends by 06/31/2016.
2.-
Mnemosyne records
show the metadata imported
by our tool
Clavy
from
Biblioteca Digital Hispánica
and from
HathiTrust
with the support of the
Complutense Library
.
3.- The
Mnemosyne
database works as
a laboratory
in which we experiment with
Clavy
the importation/exportation of metadata, and the tool
@Note
 
and practise collaborative annotation.
@Note
promotes the collaborative creation of free-text and semantic annotation schemas on literary works by communities of researchers, teachers and students and the use of these schemas in a very flexible and adaptive model for the definition of annotation activities.
4.- As
SmartLibrary, Mnemosyne
will integrate
@Note
and other digital
tools (forthcoming). Of course we are very much interested in DARIAH tools and its research infrastructure and we would like to collaborate with this European consortium. Besides, our
SmartLibrary
could be an extraordinary field of study in which to experience the development and integration of new digital tools.
Mnemosyne
, as a
SmartLibrary
, could become a field of international experimentation for the practice of tools with semantic interoperable networks.
5.- The Spanish
Mnemosyne
is the first example of what we would like to build. We would like to regrow our
smart
model in the international environment with the support of other European projects, interested, like the authors, in rare and forgotten texts and the uses of the past.
Mnemosyne: SmartLibrary for Rare and Forgotten Texts
needs transnational collaboration
. This project involves the integration of specialists in different European literatures and researchers in computer science to develop new research and resources for the common use of European citizens.
The research developed in
Mnemosyne
is being financed by: 1) Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad. Research Project: “Escritorios Electrónicos para las Literaturas-2”. Reference FFI2012-34666 (2012-2016). Directora: Dolores Romero López, Facultad de Filología, Complutese University of Madrid . 2) I Convocatoria de Ayudas a Proyectos de Investigación de la Fundación BBVA: “Modelo unificado de Gestión de Colecciones Digitales con Estructuras Reconfigurables: Aplicación a la Creación de Bibliotecas Digitales Especializadas para Investigación y Docencia”. Reference: HUM14_251(2015-2016).  Director: José Luis Sierra Rodríguez, Facultad de Informática, Complutense University of Madrid
RESEARCH GROUPS:
LEETHI Research Group
,
ILSA Research Group
,
LOEP Research Group
.
Bibliography
Alonso, C.
(2008). Sobre la categoría canónica de 'raros y olvidados'.
Anales de Literatura Española
,
20
: 11-38.
Doran, G. T.
(1981). There's a S.M.A.R.T. way to write management's goals and objectives.
Management Review
(AMA FORUM),
70
(11): 35–36.
Labanyi
,
J.
(2003).
Constructing Identity in Contemporary Spain
.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Romero López, D. ed.
(2014).
Los márgenes de la modernidad. Temas y creadores raros y olvidados en la Edad de Plata
. Sevilla: Punto Rojo Libros.
Romero López, D.
(2014). Hacia la SmartLibrary: Mnemosyne, una biblioteca digital de textos literarios raros y olvidados de la Edad de Plata (1868-1936). Fase I, en
Humanidades Digitales: desafíos, logros y perspectivas de futuro
, Sagrario López Poza y Nieves Pena Sueiro (editoras),
Janus
, Anexo
1
: 411-22.
Romero López, D.
(2015).
Bibliotecas digitales inteligentes para la docencia y la investigación
. Eprints.ucm.es/31422/1/MySmartLibrary_Escorial_DRomero_2015.pdf.
