Scholars, researchers, and advocates of linked open data from the humanities and GLAM community are invited to participate in a half-day workshop, “Ontologies for Linked Data in the Humanities”, to take place prior to the start of Digital Humanities 2019, probably July 7th, in Utrecht, Netherlands. We are soliciting short papers (up to 2000 words) related to ontologies.
Those accepted will be circulated in an open-access online collection in advance of the workshop. (See collection for 2017 workshop here:
https://tinyurl.com/LOD4Hum
)
Selected contributors who are attending the workshop will be invited to give short presentations (5-10 mins) that will form the basis for discussion and debate.
Please note: If you are unable to attend DH2019 but would still like to contribute a paper to this open source resource, please fill in the form at the link below (it will ask you if you are attending). This link will remain open after the workshop call is complete to collect further contributions.
Potential topics include:
Ontology re-use, including the choice of whether to import or cherry-pick terms
Evaluations, applications, and implications of upper-level ontologies for humanities scholarship
Application and extension of standards such as Web Annotation, IIIF, and CIDOC-CRM to solve challenges of digital representation or to support novel forms of analysis
Strategies for combining ontologies
Challenges of linking incommensurate vocabularies or ontologies
Modules, suites, and other strategies for promoting the uptake of ontologies in large or interconnected domains
Principles of ontology organization and architecture
Tensions between simplicity and complexity or nuance
Revision, management, versioning, and usage of dynamic ontologies
Impacts of particular ontologies on discoverability, visualization, or analysis
Reviews or overviews of generic tools for managing, versioning, or publishing ontologies
Paper submissions are due May 13th
, after which the conference program committee will review them and notify potential participants, with a schedule of presentations, no later than June 7th. If you plan to participate in the workshop either as attendee or presenter, you will need to register for it through the DH2019 conference.
The 2017 workshop resulted in this collection:
Advancing Linked Open Data in the Humanities
. We intend to publish the 2019 collection of short papers in a similar format in advance of the workshop.
Short papers should be submitted using
this form
, which asks you to provide a link to your paper and confirm your willingness to make your submission part of an openly available online resource with a CC-BY-NC licence.
Looking forward to hearing about the exciting work everyone is doing with Linked Open Data!
